Aidan/dockerfileless mode (#232)
latchbio/latch: docs/source/basics/defining_environment.md

    bash Miniconda3-latest-Linux-x86_64.sh -b -p /opt/conda && \
    rm -f Miniconda3-latest-Linux-x86_64.sh && \
    conda init bash
copy environment.yml /opt/latch/environment.yml
run conda env create --file /opt/latch/environment.yml --name workflow
shell ["conda", "run", "--name", "workflow", "/bin/bash", "-c"]
run pip install --upgrade latch
```
</details>
<br />

### R Packages
A local R environment will be created using an `environment.R` script. This script should include all the R packages needed to run the relevant R scripts in a workflow. R 4.0 is the default version.

<details>
<summary>Example File</summary>

```R
install.packages("RCurl")
install.packages("BiocManager")
BiocManager::install("S4Vectors")
```
</details>
<br />

<details>
<summary>Docker commands</summary>

```Dockerfile
run apt-get update --yes && \
    apt-get install --yes software-properties-common && \
    add-apt-repository "deb http://cloud.r-project.org/bin/linux/debian buster-cran40/" && \
    apt-get install --yes r-base r-base-dev libxml2-dev libcurl4-openssl-dev libssl-dev wget
copy environment.R /opt/latch/environment.R
run Rscript /opt/latch/environment.R
```
</details>
<br />

> ### System (Debian) Packages

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### System: APT
```

> Requirements found in `system-requirements.txt` are installed system-wide using apt.

Reviewer: - rephrased inline with the above
```suggestion
Dependencies from a `system-requirements.txt` text document will be automatically installed using `apt-get install --yes`
```
include `--no-install-recommends` somehow?

<details>
<summary>Example File</summary>

```
autoconf
samtools
```
</details>
<br />

<details>

> <summary>Docker commands</summary>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<summary>Generated Dockerfile Commands</summary>
```

```Dockerfile
copy system-requirements.txt /opt/latch/system-requirements.txt

> run apt-get update --yes && xargs apt-get install --yes </opt/latch/system-requirements.txt

Reviewer: ```suggestion
run apt-get update --yes && \
    xargs apt-get install --yes < /opt/latch/system-requirements.txt
```

```
</details>
<br />

### Environment Variables

> Environment variables found in an `environment` file will be used to set environment variables inside the workflow environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Environment variables from an `environment` text document will be automatically set in the workflow environment.
```

Reviewer: would really want this to be `.env`

<details>
<summary>Example File</summary>

```
BOWTIE2_INDEXES=reference

> PATH="$PATH:/root/bowtie2"

Reviewer: the existing of PATH usually goes at the end
```suggestion
PATH="/root/bowtie2:$PATH"
```

```
</details>
<br />

<details>

> <summary>Docker commands</summary>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<summary>Generated Dockerfile Commands</summary>
```

```Dockerfile

> env {line1}

Reviewer: u lazy
```suggestion
env BOWTIE2_INDEXES="reference"
```

> env {line2}

Reviewer: same

...
```
</details>
<br />

---
<br>

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Ejecting Auto-generation
```

> To save the generated Dockerfile in the workflow directory, run `latch dockerfile {path_to_workflow_directory}`. The generated Dockefile will be used during subsequent `latch register` and `latch develop` commands to build the workflow environment, and it can be user modified. To go back to the autogenerated Dockerfile, delete the Dockerfile in the workflow directory.

Reviewer: - rephrase in a more factual tone (rather than a how-to tone)
- rewrite the command line parameter to be in canonical Unix notation (except Unix also wants you to write the parameter in all-caps which I aint doin)
- rewrite the second sentence in active voice instead of passive
- added more details
- added suggested use-cases
- added a second suggestion-beg since its relevant here
```suggestion
The auto-generated Dockerfile can be saved to the workflow root using `latch dockerfile <path to workflow root>`. Subsequent `latch register` and `latch develop` commands will use the saved version. This also disables automatic generation so no dependency files will be used and changes in these files will not have any effect. Removing the Dockerfile will re-enable automatic generation.

This can be used to switch to a more complicated handwritten Dockerfile or to debug any issues with auto-generation.

If you use ejection because auto-generation does not cover your use case, please [open a suggestion on GitHub.](https://github.com/latchbio/latch/issues)
```

> To understand the generated Dockefile, here is an example with instructive comments generated by running `latch init --template subprocess --dockerfile example_workflow`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Example of Auto-generated Dockerfile
The following Dockerfile is generated in the `subprocess` template (using `latch init --template subprocess --dockerfile example_workflow`):
```

```Dockerfile
# latch base image + dependencies for latch SDK --- removing these will break the workflow
from 812206152185.dkr.ecr.us-west-2.amazonaws.com/latch-base:ace9-main
run pip install latch==2.12.1
run mkdir /opt/latch

# install system requirements
copy system-requirements.txt /opt/latch/system-requirements.txt
run apt-get update --yes && xargs apt-get install --yes </opt/latch/system-requirements.txt

# copy all code from package (use .dockerignore to skip files)
copy . /root/

# set environment variables
env BOWTIE2_INDEXES=reference

# latch internal tagging system + expected root directory --- changing these lines will break the workflow
arg tag
env FLYTE_INTERNAL_IMAGE $tag
workdir /root
```

> Latch has three base images, one without hardware acceleration drivers, one with CUDA drivers, and one with OPENCL drivers. To use the CUDA or OPENCL base image, use the `--cuda` or `--opencl` flags when running `latch init`.

Reviewer: - I don't think this should be here, probably just add this info under `latch init`
- this is just an example after all
- will mention this in introduction instead

> ## Ignoring files

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Excluding Files
```

> In the above Dockerfile, the line `copy . /root/` recursively copies all files and directories from the workflow directory into the Docker image. Even if files in the workflow directory are unused by the workflow, they will still be copied. Having unnecessary files in the image increases its size, slowing workflow execution and registration. Additionally, any changes to said files will cause image rebuilding when running `latch register` or `latch develop` on the workflow, making the process slower. To mitigate this, Latch uses a `.dockerignore` file in the workflow directory. This file should contain a list of files and directories that should be skipped when copying files into your container, as documented [here](https://docs.docker.com/engine/reference/builder/#dockerignore-file). Each workflow begins with a default `.dockerignore` file that ignores common pesky files (for example, `.latch_report.tar.gz` and other auto-generated files).

Reviewer: - make independent from the example
- some rephrasing
- a few extra details
- dropped the part about `latch develop`/`latch register` cuz i dont actually think it adds anything to the previous sentence
- "pesky" is just funny
- mention "proportional to size" to explain that number of files doesn't really matter but large files matter a lot
```suggestion
By default, all files in the workflow root directory are included in the workflow build. Any unnecessary files will increase the resulting workflow container image size and increase registration and startup time proportional to their size.

To exclude files from the build use [a `.dockerignore`.](https://docs.docker.com/engine/reference/builder/#dockerignore-file) Files can be specified one at a time or using glob patterns.

The default `.dockerignore` includes files auto-generated by Latch.
```

## Docker Limitations

> The difference between a latch task environment and running code on a Linux machine is that we restrict access to root system resources. For example, `/dev` and the networking stack are restricted, so creating mounts using `/dev/fuse` is not permitted. We limit this behavior to prevent users from accessing sensitive system resources that could influence other tasks running on the same machine. In the future, we will support full container isolation, allowing users to treat their containers as complete linux machines.

Reviewer: no mounts will work on normal docker (like the `mount` command itself will error)
also some parts will work under sysbox

> The difference between a latch task environment and running code on a Linux machine is that we restrict access to root system resources. For example, `/dev` and the networking stack are restricted, so creating mounts using `/dev/fuse` is not permitted. We limit this behavior to prevent users from accessing sensitive system resources that could influence other tasks running on the same machine. In the future, we will support full container isolation, allowing users to treat their containers as complete linux machines.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Docker containers have limitations on some system administration functions. While each workflow runs as a genuine `root` user (UID 0), commands that require [kernel capabilities](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man7/capabilities.7.html) will fail with "Permission denied". This includes `mount` and `chroot` among others.
```

> # The Workflow Environment

Reviewer: this section needs a paragraph on the `--dockerfile` option in `latch init`

> # The Workflow Environment

Reviewer: needs a paragraph on the `latch init` and base images

Dockerfiles are often overkill for simple applications. To solve having to write a Dockerfile for simple cases, the Latch SDK will automatically generate a Dockefile at registration time for a given workflow directory.

## Environment Definition Files

The workflow author controls optional files in the workflow directory that are used to generate the Dockerfile if present. Below is an exhaustive list of the files used to auto-generate a Dockerfile. If this list does not cover a use case, please open an issue on the [Latch SDK Github](https://github.com/latchbio/latch), and we will respond shortly.

<br>

### Python PyPI Packages
Python requirements found in `requirements.txt` are installed into the default python that executes task code.

<details>
<summary>Example File</summary>

```
boto3==1.20.24
boto3-stubs[s3,sts,sns,ses,logs]
kubernetes
awscli==1.22.24
```
</details>
<br />

<details>
<summary>Docker commands</summary>

```Dockerfile
copy requirements.txt /opt/latch/requirements.txt
run pip install --requirement /opt/latch/requirements.txt
```
</details>

> <br />

Author: I dislike this. It becomes too verbose and the page is hard to skim for what one needs. In most cases, users should not have to care about each section. They probably only care about expanding one or two of the file example sections.

### Local Python Packages
Local python packages, indicated by a `setup.py` or `pyproject.toml` file in the workflow directory, will be installed into the default python that executes task code.

<details>
<summary>Example File</summary>

```python
from setuptools import find_packages, setup

setup(
    name="latch",
    version="v2.12.1",
    author_email="kenny@latch.bio",
    description="The Latchbio SDK",
    packages=find_packages(),
    include_package_data=True,
    python_requires=">=3.8",
    entry_points={
        "console_scripts": [
            "latch=latch_cli.main:main",
        ]
    },
    install_requires=[
        "awscli==1.25.22",
    ],
    classifiers=[
        "Programming Language :: Python :: 3.10",
    ],
)
```
</details>
<br />

<details>
<summary>Docker commands</summary>

```Dockerfile
run pip install --editable /root/
```
</details>
<br />

### Conda Environment

> A conda python environment, indicated by a `environment.yml` or an `environment.yaml` file, will be used to create an isolated python environment in which all shell commands execute. Any subprocess run with `shell=True` will have access to the binaries and packages defined in the environment file. Miniconda is installed into the workflow environment as the conda manager.

Author: I am wrong. Fixed.

```Dockerfile
# latch base image + dependencies for latch SDK --- removing these will break the workflow
from 812206152185.dkr.ecr.us-west-2.amazonaws.com/latch-base:ace9-main
run pip install latch==2.12.1
run mkdir /opt/latch

# install system requirements
copy system-requirements.txt /opt/latch/system-requirements.txt
run apt-get update --yes && xargs apt-get install --yes </opt/latch/system-requirements.txt

# copy all code from package (use .dockerignore to skip files)
copy . /root/

# set environment variables
env BOWTIE2_INDEXES=reference

# latch internal tagging system + expected root directory --- changing these lines will break the workflow
arg tag
env FLYTE_INTERNAL_IMAGE $tag
workdir /root
```

Latch has three base images, one baseline, one with CUDA drivers, and one with OPENCL drivers. To use the CUDA or OPENCL base image, modify the from directive in the Dockerfile to `.../`latch-base-cuda`:...` or `.../`latch-base-opencl`:...`.

## Ignoring files
In the above Dockerfile, the line 

```Dockerfile
copy . /root/
```

> recursively copies files and directories from the workflow directory into the Docker image. Even if files in the workflow directory are unused by the workflow, they will be copied into the docker image. Having unnecessary files in the image increases its size, slowing workflow execution and registration. Additionally, any changes to said files will cause image rebuilding when running `latch register` or `latch develop` on the workflow, making the process slower. To avoid this, Latch uses a `.dockerignore` file in the workflow directory. This file should contain a list of files and directories that should be skipped when copying files into your container, as documented [here](https://docs.docker.com/engine/reference/builder/#dockerignore-file). Each workflow begins with a default `.dockerignore` file that ignores common pesky files.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
recursively copies all files and directories from the workflow directory into the Docker image. Even if files in the workflow directory are unused by the workflow, they will still be copied. Having unnecessary files in the image increases its size, slowing workflow execution and registration. Additionally, any changes to said files will cause image rebuilding when running `latch register` or `latch develop` on the workflow, making the process slower. To mitigate this, Latch uses a `.dockerignore` file in the workflow directory. This file should contain a list of files and directories that should be skipped when copying files into your container, as documented [here](https://docs.docker.com/engine/reference/builder/#dockerignore-file). Each workflow begins with a default `.dockerignore` file that ignores common pesky files (for example, `.latch_report.tar.gz` and other auto-generated files).
```

## Docker Limitations

> The difference between a latch task environment and running code on a Linux machine is that we restrict access to root system resources. For example, `/dev` and the networking stack are restricted, so creating mounts using `/dev/fuse` is not permitted. We limit this behavior to prevent users from accessing sensitive system resources that could influence other tasks running on the same machine. In the future, we will support full container isolation, allowing users to treat their containers as complete linux machines.

Reviewer 2: also we may wanna add a feature roadmap at some point

---

```{toctree}
:hidden:
:maxdepth: 2
environment/dockerfile_per_task
environment/docker_recipes

> ```

Reviewer 2: do you have docs for adding `apt` packages? i didnt see one

Author: `Requirements found in `system-requirements.txt` are installed system-wide using apt.`
